Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. One of today's most popular and prolific
science fiction authors is Fred Saberhagen. Saberhagen is best known for two
series. One is a five-novel set on Dracula. The other consists of a novel in
over 30 stories on the Berserkers. As with many other science fiction writers,
Saberhagen began by reading it. When I was very young, when I was like eight or
nine years old, I came upon this old pulp magazine, secondhand magazine
someplace, and there were a couple of stories in there that really impressed me.
I think they scared the daylights out of me, actually.
And magazines of that kind were prohibited for a very while from being brought
into the house. Then I just kind of went away from it for a few years. When I
was about 16, I started haunting the secondhand magazine shops, which they then
had in Chicago, and picking up old copies of Astounding, as it was then called.
And then I didn't really get into writing until later on. I was in the Air Force
in my 20s, and I had a lot of time on my hands. I would make a stab at it now
and then. And still, I guess I didn't have access to a typewriter and all this
privacy and so on. And still nothing really came of it. And I was in, let's
see, I was almost 30 before I actually sat
down and seriously wrote a story and really typed out the manuscript properly
and got it, sent it off to be sold. Saberhagen has some interesting thoughts on
science fiction and its relation to mainstream or regular literature. I guess
when you say mainstream, I guess I'm coming to think more and more of mainstream
as kind of an offshoot of writing or literature or whatever you call it, where
you're limited to things
that can only happen with a high probability in the next block or in the next
two months or something like that. And I think if you look back historically,
most of the literature has really been wide open. You're allowed to use ghosts.
You're allowed to go to other planets. You can do all these things. We've
somehow turned this around and put this in its own little ghetto. But I think it
really should be the other way. Sometimes the border between mainstream
literature, the kind that deals with everyday reality, and science fiction
becomes vague. Reality can catch up with science fiction quickly. Saberhagen
uses one of his own books, Octagon, published in 1981, to point this out. And
it's probably as close to a mainstream thing as I've ever done. It's set in the
very near future, and it's largely about computers and programming and people
who play games with computers. And I guess when I started to write it, it was
still science fiction, and by the time it's published, it may be just a little
out of date even. I don't know. Saberhagen talks about Dracula and the
Berserkers, two of his most popular creations. I think what's got the biggest
reader response by far is the Dracula books I've done. I get more letters and
mail and sometimes more money for one of those than for all the Berserkers. The
Berserkers have been around a long time, and a lot of people have picked
up on them over the years, but they're not really what sells the most books now.
We'll have more on Fred Saberhagen tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Fred Saberhagen has been a professional
science fiction author for some 17 years. His output is notable for its variety.
Even though he writes typical science fiction, good science fiction such as the
popular Berserker series, he tries related areas too. I like to change back and
forth, I think. I get a little tired of doing whatever it is I'm doing after a
long book, and then I like to do something as different as I can find from that.
One of his novels that varies from straight science fiction is The Huge Empire
of the East, a story with the characteristics of science fantasy. Originally
there were three books, The Broken Lands, The Black Mountains, and Changeling
Earth. And they came out some years earlier
with split up among two different publishers, as it happened, the way problems
of publishing and everything being what they are. Magic works in the Empire of
the East, and sorcery is an occupation. And this is so because the structure of
atoms has been changed, making nuclear power and technology impossible. But at
the novel's end, there's a tremendous battle between inhuman forces. One is
Orcus, a demon power that represents the irrational into magic. The other is
Ardna, a super machine which has gathered enough strength to challenge the
magical foundation of the world. The result of the battle is a balance.
Technology and magic will coexist. The world was changing again, and at least
for a time, both of these kinds of powers would be functional. In 1976,
Saberhagen published a horror story in the classic tradition, a mysterious
house, an unknown force haunting it, a family buying the house and moving in.
The book is Specimens. Kind of a fun story, if you can call it that, of a menace
to be overcome. The old house in the story, by the way, really exists in
Lombard. It did a few years ago. When we lived in Chicago, we were looking for
houses in the area there, and that was one that we looked at. The power haunting
the house is an alien living beneath it. It's been there for centuries, even
before the house was built, capturing humans as specimens. It was an attempt to
write a good grade B movie plot, and nobody's bought it yet to make a good grade
B movie, but there's a new Ace edition coming out in a few months here, and
maybe somebody will. Another facet of Saberhagen's variety is seen in a little
-known satire, Love Conquers All, which came out in 1974. It extrapolates
strongly from present social trends, and in that sense is reminiscent of Poul and
Kornbluth's advertising classic, The Space Merchants. But Saberhagen
extrapolates from something very different than advertising. I guess it was the
controversy
about abortion and sex, and things were bombarded, questions we're faced with
all the time here. And I just tried to, you know, the traditional science
fiction writer's viewpoint, take a look at everything, turn everything inside
out, and see how it looks from the other point of view. In Love Conquers All,
Saberhagen totally reverses all our present attitudes towards sex and love. The
book presents a world in which a wife should have affairs, in which virginity is
horrifying. And, as a clever touch, the curses people use are words like purity
and chastity. We asked Saberhagen if the book had a message. Was it satire? Was
he on a soapbox? No, I think
that's your department, really. You know, whether it's satire or what it is, I
think I've, as I said, I think I've done my job when I've written it. So I
wouldn't say you're wrong. Classify it however you will. Tomorrow, more of Fred
Saberhagen.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Dracula, the fearsome vampire of legend and
myth. You wouldn't think anything new could be written on him. But Science
Fiction author Fred Saberhagen thought otherwise. So far, he's written five
novels on Dracula. The Dracula tape is the first one, which is a recounting of
the original, Bram Stoker's original Dracula story, only seen from the point of
view of the count. And there's Holmes Dracula, and an old friend of the family,
and Thorn, which is out now. Since we spoke with Saberhagen, the fifth book in
the series, Dominion, has come out. We asked him how he got interested in
Dracula. Well, I just sat down one day, and just for fun, I wanted to reread the
original Dracula, which I had read once before, years earlier. And I think it's
not all that good a book, really, apart from this titanic, devilish, central
character. But it struck me more and more as I read through it that Dracula was
hardly ever on stage in this thing. Everybody's talking about him, and he's
almost always off somewhere doing something. Nobody quite knows what.
So I guess maybe I had Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead on my mind or
something like that. But I just thought, what would it look like from the chief
villain's point of view? So off I went. It was an awful lot of fun to write, and
it just seemed to go right along. The first book was The Dracula Tape, published
in 1975. In this novel, Dracula is telling what really happened to Lucy,
Professor Van Helsing, and Jonathan, the characters from the Bram Stoker novel.
As it turns out, the Count is a victim of circumstances, and Van Helsing is a
demented loony. In Saberhagen's account, the vampire almost never kills anyone.
He just takes a quart to go. It was Van Helsing who was accidentally killing the
victims by giving them blood transfusions from persons whose blood type didn't
match. And readers liked it. It was something different. Dracula from the
vampire's point of view. And Saberhagen had something different, even unique,
for the sequel, entitled The Holmes Dracula File. The time came to think about
doing a sequel for it, and it occurred to me that nobody had ever put Holmes and
Dracula in the same book up to that point, as far as I knew. And it seemed to me
they, this would be very interesting, it's as if they represented the two sides
of the human psyche, or the intellect and the dark side. And here they were,
they were contemporaries, they were in the same city in the same year, and
everybody knew about them both, and still they'd never, you know, they just
completely missed each other, so I decided I had to try to make contact there
someplace. Can Saberhagen's Dracula material be considered science fiction? Its
popularity is obvious, but does it attract science fiction readers or some other
type? Sometimes you see it on the fantasy shelf in the bookstore, sometimes you
see it in occult, sometimes you see it on the new shelf where all the zombies
and haunted babies and all these modern, recent things appear. I don't really
care as long as people are reading it. I don't know if they're science fiction
readers. Some of them think they're vampires. You get a pretty good, maybe some
of them are vampires. How do the Dracula books compare with Saberhagen's other
books in terms of reader response? I think what's got the biggest reader
response by far is the Dracula books I've done. I get more letters and mail and
sometimes more money. We'll have more on Fred Saberhagen tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. In the worlds of science fiction, the
deadliest enemies man has to face are the berserkers of Fred Saberhagen. The
berserkers are machines, highly intelligent machines that are able to reproduce
and to repair themselves endlessly. They come in all sizes, from immense globes
the size of worlds to robots or androids that simulate human beings. And they
are all deadly killing machines. Each berserker is programmed to do one thing
and one thing only, to seek out and destroy all life. Author Saberhagen
discusses the origin of the term. Of course, the berserkers historically are the
Norse warriors who would go mad and run around killing people until they were
killed. And I don't know why, it just seemed to come along with the original
concept and I used it. The berserkers originated far in the past, before
humanity had achieved technology or space travel. There had been two super races
engaged in interstellar war. One of them had produced and programmed the
berserker machines to annihilate its enemies. Now the two warring races have
vanished, but the berserkers remain, fulfilling their function of searching out
and destroying all forms of life. Saberhagen recalls when he wrote his first
berserker story. I was writing, let's see, back very early, in the early 1960s.
I was writing short stories, most of which were being published in Galaxy or
Worlds of If, Worlds of Tomorrow. Fred Pohl was the editor then. And I had this
good idea for a short, kind of a puzzle short story. And I got about halfway
through the story and I said, well, what sort of a villain will I have? And I
said, I know what sort of villain I'll have. I'll have this giant robotic
spaceship, 50 miles in diameter, etc., etc. And I just looked around and there
it was. Saberhagen's editor, Frederik Pohl, liked the berserker idea. Fred Pohl
really liked the berserker. He bought the story. He wasn't all that crazy about
the story, but he liked the berserker. And he said, why don't you do some more
berserkers and have somebody go on one of these things and so on. And it's just
there for a while about all I wrote was berserkers. Since the 60s, Saberhagen
has written some 30 berserker stories for various science fiction magazines.
Most have been collected in four volumes. Berserker, The Ultimate Enemy,
Berserker Man, and The Berserker Wars. And he's also written one berserker
novel, Brother Assassin. Many of the berserker stories are related, with
recurring characters or settings. They are also spread over a huge span of time,
thousands of years, so that Saberhagen can experiment with different human
cultures and technologies as mankind battles its seemingly unstoppable enemy. We
asked Saberhagen if he had worked out a precise future history or timeline for
the berserker material. What I've tried to do is just always leave plenty of
room in every direction. I have this war going on for thousands of years and
over at least a good part of the galaxy. And I've never really... I guess if you
asked me about two different stories, I could probably tell you which one was
supposed to come ahead of the other one. But I just wanted to avoid being too
limited. Fred Pohl thought I was about to wipe out all the berserkers there at
one point. I did a story called Stone Place, where this huge berserker fleet was
destroyed. But I took care that some of them got away at least. The berserkers
haven't been destroyed, so the battle is still going on. But Saberhagen isn't
sure he'll do any more stories on the material. Right now I don't have any
special urge to write another berserker story. And I don't know if I ever will
or not.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.